---
layout: post
title: svg-intro
date: '2021-03-12 16:18'
tags: ["svg", "html5"]
---

## SVG, Scalable Vector Graphics

Following [SVG tutorial on MDN Web Docs][eb7b29e8]

Language to draw vector graphics. We can also apply transformation to all its components.

SVG is supported by all major browsers.

An SVG document consists in a `<svg>` root element and elements to draw basic geometric shapes. In addtion there is the `<g>` element which groups different basic shapes together.

[Inkscape][3a9bf671] uses SVG as it's native format.

Attribute values in SVG must be placed inside quotes, even in the case of numbers.

Order of rendering the elements: later elements are rendered atop previous elements.

### Positioning the elements
SVG uses a coordinate system, top left corner is the point of origin (0, 0).

One unit in the coordinate system equals one screen unit (pixel). For example `<svg width="800" height="600"></svg>` defines a 800x600px canvas.

With `viewbox` attribute we can define a portion of that canvas to display.

```
<svg width="800" height="600" viewbox="0 0 400 300"></svg>
```
The whole canvas is 800x600px but the `viewbox` attibute defines the part of the canvas that will be visible.

### Basic shapes
**Rectangle**
```
<rect x="10" y="10" rx="6" ry="6" width="80" height="60"/>
```
**Circle**
```
<circle cx="40" cy="40" r="60"/>
```
**Ellipse**
```
<ellipse cx="40" cy="40" rx="60" ry="30"/>
```
**Line**
```
<line x1="10" y1="40" x2="60" y2="30"/>
```
**Polyline**
A group of connected straight lines, all the points (x, y) are included in a ist as `points` attribute. numbers separated by comma, space, EOL or LF.
```
<polyline points="40 60, 80 90, 115 125"/>
```
**Polygon**
Similar to a `polyline` in that a series of points are connected with straight lines, but in a polygon the last point automatically connects with the first, creating a closed shape.
### Path
The most general shape that can be used in SVG, with it we can draw lines, curves and more. Paths create shapes by combining multiple straight or curved lines.

The shape of a `<path>` element is defined by one parameter: `d`, it contains a series of commands and parameters used by those commands.

All the commands come in 2 variants, *uppercase letter* specifies absolute coordinates on the page, a *lowercase letter* specifies relative coordinates from last point.

**Line commands**
There are 5 line commands for `<path>` nodes:
**Move To** or `M`, it takes 2 parameters, x and y, coordinates to move to. This command appears at the beginning of paths to specify where the drawing should start.
`<path d="M 10 5">` or `<path d="m 10 5">`
There are 3 commands to draw lines:
**Line To**
`<path d="L 10 5">` or `<path d="l 10 5">`
**Horizontal line**, `H` and `V`, they only take one parameter since they only move in one direction.
`<path d="H 10">` or `<path d="h 10">`
`<path d="V 10">` or `<path d="v 10">`

Example drawing a rectangle with `path`.

```
<!-- Both draw the same rectangle -->
<rect x="10" y="10" width="90" height="40" />
<path d="M 10 10 h 90 v 40 H 10 L 10 10" />
```
We can shorten the above path by using the **Close Path** command `Z`, this draws a straight line to the first point in path.

### Curve commands
There are three different commands to create smooth curves, two are Bézier curves, and the third is an arc or part of a circle.
### Bézier curves
**Cubic curve** `C` takes two control points, therefore to draw a cubic Bézier we must specify 3 sets of coordinates: `C x1 y1, x2 y2, x y` or `c dx1 dy1, dx2 dy2, dx dy` The last set of coordinates `(x, y)` specify the end of the line, the other two pairs are control points. `(x1, y1)` is the control point for the start of the curve, and `(x2, y2)` is the end control point.
*Control points* describe the slope of the line starting at each point. The Bézier function creates a smooth curve from the slope at the beginning to the slope at the end.
`<path d="M 70 10 C 70 20, 110 20, 110 10" stroke="black" fill="transparent"/>`

Several Bézier curves can be concatenated to create smooth shapes, often the control point on one side of a point will be a reflection of the control point used on the other side to keep the slope constant. In this case a shortcut version of the cubic Bézier can be used, designated by the command `S` or `s`. `S x2 y2, x y`. `S` always follows another `S` or `C` command, the first control point is assumed to be the previous one.

**Quadratic curve** `Q` is simpler than the cubic. It requires one control point wich determines the slope of the curve at both the start and the end point. It takes two pair of parameters, control point `(x1, y1)` and end point `(x, y)`. `Q x1 y1 x y`

`<path d="M 10 80 Q 95 10 180 80" stroke="black" fill="transparent"/>`

As with the cubic curve, there is a shortcut for stringing together multiple curves `T` or `t`. `T x y`

`<path d="M 10 80 Q 95 10 80 80 t 40 40/>"`

### Arcs
Arcs are sections of circles or ellipses. For a given x-radius and y-radius there are two ellipses that can connect any two points (as long as they are within the radius of the circle). Along either of those circles, there are two possible paths that can be taken to connect the points, so in any situation there are 4 possible arcs available. Because of this, arcs require quite a few parameters:
`A rx ry x-axis-rotation large-arc-flag sweep-flag x y` As befor, we can use `a`.

`rx ry` define x and y radius, `x, y` the coordinates of end of stroke. `x-axis-rotation` describes the rotation of the arc (visualize it as the rotation of the ellipse around its center point).
`large-arc-flag`

[Understanding SVG arcs][94bbf593]

### Fills and strokes
`fill` sets the color inside the object, `stroke` the color of the line drawing the object.
`fill-opacity` and `stroke-opacity`
`stroke-width`,strokes are drawn centered around the path.
`stroke-linecap` can be set to `"butt"` `"square"` and `"round"`.

`butt` closes the line offwith a straight edge that's normal to the direction of the stroke. `square` has the same apprearance but stretchess the stroke slightly beyond the actual path by half the `stroke-width`. `round` produces a rounded effect on the end of the stroke, the radius is controlled by `stroke-width`.

`stroke-linejoin` defines how the joint between two line segments is drawn, there are 3 possible values for `stroke-linejoin` attribute, `miter`, `round` and `bevel`.

`miter` extends the line slightly (`stroke-width` / 2) beyond its normal width to create a square corner. `round` creates a rounded segment. `bevel` creates a new angle to aid in the transition betweenth two segments.

We can use dashed line types on a stroke by specifying the `stroke-dasharray` attribute, it takes a series of comma-separated numbers as argument. The first number specifies a distance for the filled area, the second number a distance for the unfilled area. We can specify more numbers for a more complex dash pattern.

There are additional stroke and fill properties, as `fill-rule`, which specifies how to color in shapes that overlap themselves, `stroke-miterlimit` which determines if a stroke should draw miters, and `stroke-dashoffset` specifying where to start a dasharray on a line.

  [3a9bf671]: http://www.inkscape.org/ "Inkscape"
  [eb7b29e8]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG/Tutorial/Introduction "SVG tutorial on MDN Web Docs"
  [94bbf593]: https://github.com/waldyrious/understand-svg-arcs#resources "Understanding SVG arcs"
